What do the letters “INEC” stand for, Independent National Electoral Commission.
When was the Commission established and how, The Commission was established on 5th August, 1998 by Decree No. 17 of that year by the Federal Military Government.
Where can I find the law establishing INEC, Section 153 of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
What does the acronym “SIEC” stand for, State Independent Electoral Commission. Each State established a SIEC to conduct its Local Government elections while the Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) conducts the Area Council elections in the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).
Each State Independent Electoral Commission operates independently.
What does the letters “EMB” stand for, Election Management Body. (This is the body that conducts elections).
How many Election Management Bodies do we have in Nigeria, There are thirty seven (37) EMBs in Nigeria; i.e. Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) and thirty six (36) States Independent Electoral Commissions (SIECs).
What is the Mission Statement of INEC, It is “to serve as an independent and effective Election Management Body (EMB) committed to the conduct of free, fair and credible elections for sustainable democracy in Nigeria”.
What is the Vision of INEC, It is “to be one of the best Election Management Bodies in the world that meets the aspirations of the Nigerian people”.
What are the values of the Commission, The values of the Commission are as Follows:
i. Autonomy: INEC shall carry out all it’s functions independently, free from external control and influence.
ii. Transparency: INEC shall display openness and transparency in all its activities and in its relationship with all stakeholders.
iii. Integrity: INEC shall maintain truthfulness and honesty in all its dealings at all times.
iv. Credibility: INEC shall ensure that no action or activity is taken in support of any candidate or political party.
v. Impartiality: INEC shall ensure the creation of a level playing field for all political actors.
vi. Dedication. INEC shall be committed to providing quality electoral services efficiently and effectively, guided by best international practices and standards.
vii. Equity: INEC shall ensure fairness and justice in dealing with all stakeholders.
viii. Excellence: INEC shall be committed to the promotion of merit and professionalism as the basis for all its actions.
ix. Team work: INEC shall create a conducive environment that promotes teamwork among its staff at all levels.
What are the functions of INEC, Conduct elections to elective offices except those of Local Government Areas of the thirty-six (36) States of the Federation; Compile and maintain the register of voters and issue Voters’ Cards;
Conduct any referendum required in line with the 1999 Constitution or any other Act of the National Asssembly;
Delimit electoral constituencies;
Register and de-registers political parties;
Monitor the organization and operations of all political parties;
Arrange for annual examination and auditing of the finances of political parties;
Monitor the campaigns of political parties;
Carry out recall proceedings where voters can remove an elected representative in the State or National Assembly from office if they are not satisfied with the representative’s performance;
Provide rules and guidelines for its operations and the operation and conduct of political parties;
Promote knowledge of sound democratic processes;
Conduct voter and civic education;
Ensure that all Electoral Commissioners, Electoral and Returning Officers take and subscribe to oaths of office prescribed by law; delegate any of its powers to any Resident Electoral Commissioner; and carry out such other functions as may be conferred upon it by an Act of the National Assembly;
Train electoral personnel, electoral research and documentation;
Provide technical assistance to SIECs.

 